---
id: email.81x7vT7
type: Message
name: 31 flavors
date: 1999-09-01T13:37:00.000Z
from: '"Jeff Eaton" <eaton@wwa.com>'
to: eaton@wwa.com
---
today was one of those days that left me stretching and glad to be a 
webmaster. links were fixed (after receiving the El Grande 404 List Of Doom
monday), the whole message transcript situation with the servicebuilder
content was set back on the tracks, and I spent about three hours picking
the combined brains of Marty and Judd, the two volunteers who help keep the
site alive and kicking.

i've got a plan for how the server should be structured. the Right and Moral
Way For The Directories To Be Set Up. It is, of course, completely contrary
to the current system. but the magic of GREP and PERL cannot be
underestimated, and I'm anticipating some quality time migrating links on a
copy of the site. Should be fun.

Paul should be arriving back tomorrow or the day after it, and I hooked up
with David D. for a long night of video compression... it was good to talk
to him and catch up -- laughing. on the way home from work, i blared ani
difranco again, loving every moment of it.

and finally, before falling asleep tonight, i conceived of a movie script
about six genx friends who band together and create their own nation on a
sailboat in the middle of the pacific. a graphic artist, a law school
dropout, and other assorted slackers grow disillusioned and decide to
'position' themselves as the ultimate statement of independence, thus
securing endorsement deals from all the 'hip' products. conflicts follow,
etc etc.

